Meeting Title: SPUR kick-off
Date: Feb 26
Meeting participants: David Buttle, Dominicy, Dominic, Dominic

Transcript:
 
Me: Hello.  
Them: How you doing?  
Me: I'm good. Congrats, man. I'd had to feel good seeing all those articles go out.  
Them: I can't hear you. I can hear you. Oh, my computer is on mute. Apologies.  
Me: Congrats man. Good to see you. That had to be incredibly gratifying seeing all this article goes like happen.  
Them: Yeah. I mean, I don't know how you feel about Dom. It was getting pretty exhausting and unrewarding in parts of the run up to this moment, if I'm briefly honest, because it's a lot of fucking around and an indecision and. Internal politics and group politics and all this stuff. But now we're out, and it's, like, much more motivating that we can get on with stuff now. And all the more so that this call is happening at this moment in time.  
Me: Yeah. That's awesome.  
Them: How are you?  
Me: Man. I'm good. I could see the exhaustion with the process in your face when we met last a little bit. And I was just like. I can tell you from the outside, that series of Just coordinated all that stuff. Looked like it had been smooth sailing all the way through. So you all, you all pulled it off with great aplomb, shall we say?  
Them: I really hope that we're going to reach kind of proper critical mass now that it will just everyone who joins will just trigger another little onward journey, and we won't have to create momentum, we'll have to keep up with it. That's when it'll start to feel really good. In F2 with a small group, you've just got to keep pushing, and that gets tiring.  
Me: Well. You'll have to let me know. Reading through the old FAQs there, like the non media or other US media and that stuff, like when you're ready. I gave you a little shout out. I just did a webinar interview thing with like 300 some odd Publishers in our space and called out spur launching this morning. Yeah. Let me know when you want me to start pushing it through my Publishers channels, and we'll get you some additional folks.  
Them: Yeah. Fantastic. Well, yes. I guess the answer is yes. Now? Soon. But let's talk about how we get going on. We're live now. We're delighted that you have some bandwidth to help us with the project. I think the first thing it would be. I guess the first thing it'd be good for us to. I guess for us to say is to. Talk you through where we think that is and give you kind of sense of that. And then I think there's also a sort of initial conversation to be had around the work you've already done and the time you've already put in around open attribution. And how we make the most of that within sper, because there's definitely a really close synergy between those two things. What do you think, Dom? Yeah, I think for me. We need to do that kind of view of the landscape. Early on. In terms of what we think our requirements are. What we think our sort of stretch requirements might be. The things that are necessarily in scope now that could quickly become that way. And what's already out there. So one of the first emails we got when we did the announcement was from iptc, and they're obviously relevant and interesting. Standards group. I'm not sure how much overlap there is with them that they've really done, but clearly, people we quite like to have inside our tent, we've got open attribution, we've got various things going on, so that sort of landscape review and then dividing up what we need to do. In terms of technical versus policy. Just sort of engagement work and who should do it. That feels me like the kind of the mapping we need. What I think we'll discover, especially after talking to you before, is that. There's a surprising amount of stuff already out there that we can take advantage of, and that will give us a sort of shorter path to getting something kind of out there.  
Me: Yeah. I hadn't realized that IPTC had the rights expression language. Thing, it'd be interesting that. Yes. In terms of looking at the landscape, yes. But things like IPTC rights, expression, language versus really simple licensing versus those, I guess there's that kind of just the tranches of standards that you're most interested in. And then. The technical side almost as naturally follows, and then from a relationship perspective, I think I'd add to that is so like publicist is going to be a fairly public sponsor of the open Attribution. Work in the next month. Obviously having them spur side would be great. And so happy to figure out what even that relationship looks like from the org side. In addition to what work I am doing with you all specifically. I've told David this, but I'm not particularly precious about the boundaries of open attribution. To me, if the standard gets in there, And if the implementation starts, then we win as an industry, and that's what I'm focused on.  
Them: Yeah, definitely. That sounds great. So what is the stock? So the starting point? So there's basically two types of existing standards, so we need to look at. I've done a bit of work, so I'm raped into presenting around this a couple of times. So there's rights Reservation World. And licensing so I can turn in stuff I've got on that. And I guess what we'll need to do around both of those is start to build out from a Publishers perspective and I guess, sort of a journalism business perspective. What are the criteria that define kind of best in practice against in both of those spaces, both rights of ancient and licensing, and then start to assess each of these standards against each of the existing standards against those, and including, obviously open attribution. It sounds like we suspect is quite a long way the way there on the licensing side.  
Me: Yeah, I think. Overnight regions got two issues. I think the telemetry side is. A lot of what I think you all need. Pretty simple. But at the end of the day, Is there a standard format that we get citations out so that we can have a common language around, like, if you're going to charge per citation or per retrieval or per quote? That it's just like we can point at it and say, this is. I had 100 quotations according to the open attribution signals that has meaning and therefore I can negotiate for what that value. That, then also is the auditability side, which I think is the important part there when it comes to licensing. The disclosure label stuff that I've worked on is I'm trying to make it very agnostic because I don't know where the licensing standards land. I'm thinking it's much more just a technical. Like, if you're an agent, how do you declare your licenses, whatever those licenses are? And I think that kind of pragmatic implementation work feels a little bit like where the gap is to my mind at the moment.  
Them: To cartahu.  
Me: Another agent.  
Them: Okay?  
Me: So, like, if ChatGPT calls up the BBC agent or whatever it says. Oh, okay, hold on. I am, in fact, a BBC agent. I am the canonical source of DVC content, and I have the right to convey a license to use this content to you, ChatGPT. And this is what that license, like, you can use it once with your user. You cannot resell it. All that stuff. But in terms of what the license is, you all know much more than me about that. In terms of. I'm not even licensing versus rights reservation all that. I'm more going, how do I communicate whatever it is? To the receiving party in this kind of machine, machine world.  
Them: Yeah. And I think on the licensing stuff, what we. What we're not the kind of brief. The initial brief for the. From the group is like, narrowly, the telemetry piece of that. So we're not touching, like, the licensing engine or the rules around the licensing. We're just saying. Bot has requested piece of content content to bot unique identifier applied to content in some kind of ideally indelible kind of metadata format and then usage events. Pinged back into licensing infrastructure such that we know when content is being used. There may be dom, you've done more of this stuff than me, but I guess that when we start getting into the specifics, it gets more complex because you have to sort of define usage events. And this kind of thing. But, yeah, that's the kind of the, that's the scope for the new thing that we're sort of doing the discovery to build. And then alongside that, there's obviously. Being in the working groups that are trying to define new standards and talking to technical, talking to sort of commercial vendors who are trying to define standards like, say, for instance, Cloudflare with their content signals and whole bit, have got a sort of standard of sort on which their marketplace operates. So that we say, so that we can go and assess how they're doing against what we think is sort of sell side defined standards and nudge and control and advocate and influence in order that they move in that direction, if they're not there already.  
Me: Yeah. Let me show you what I've gotten that realm first. I think that might be a useful place here. I need to change the slide slightly to be more clear. But basically, any of these, at any of these stages, The telemetry is designed to be able to be emitted. So if it's say tollbit going, this content was retrieved this number of times or whatever it is that can come out just as a sheer counter. It says urlx retrieved. Ideally, then you get the cited. Which now has to be an agent side implementation that the agent reports out. Like, yes, I showed this to a user or I actually quoted it, or these kind of things. That's my mind. The next step on that funnel. Then there's an outcome along the way, which can be a click on an individual link. It could be out to a sale, it could be the agent making a purchase. It can just be the conversation ended, whatever it is. But the trigger that the agent says. Okay, cool. Now I'll. Send the total content so you can either get citations in real time like this session ID had this content ID cited to it.  
Them: Y.  
Me: Or you can get it all at once. At the end, when an outcome happens, depending on how the agent sets it up.  
Them: Eah, for our use case. It's real time. Not because there is no sort of endpoint aside from information retrieval needs satisfied.  
Me: Yeah. And then I think the question here, too, is saying. This citation type element. Right. So there's the whole, like, it was just cited. But I'd imagine that's not good enough, right, to be able to then say, here's the sentence it was quoted in, or like, that's the big question of crossover between privacy, auditability that we're going to have to address with the platforms.  
Them: Yeah. There's two things and we'll have to tease out within the standard. One is an influence event. And secondly is a citation event. And those two things are not the same. As you said, that's another kind of layer of complexity that we'll need to build on because there are circumstances under which stuff is ragged off but not cited.  
Me: Yeah. Y.  
Them: I don't know whether the other way around is true. Probably. Hopefully not. But. Yeah, probably shouldn't.  
Me: Eah. And also, like, how do you. How do you tell the agent like it just hallucinated a quote from the BBC without going right?  
Them: Exactly. So let's assume that doesn't happen.  
Me: Badly happens.  
Them: The sort of architectural level. I think we need to keep this relatively simple at this point, because I think so something being retrieved that is an event, a sort of precursor event that kind of has to happen. Or that content is then be usable. By the AI. The events that happen inside their system. Will continue to evolve over time. And at the minute, we're sort of imagining them a little bit, so, yeah, citation. That's really obvious. It's an event and it produces output. But there's loads of other stuff happening inside those systems which I suspect, over time will start to want and the market will start to demand more granularity about those things. So over time, those, those sort of. Events that trigger a report will become more complex. You will be able to define a more granular set of events. Which ones actually become reportable depends on the agreement between the AI and whoever owns the content. So the fact that they exist as sort of notional events doesn't necessarily mean they'll be relevant. To every deal. And that's where also we need to separate the deal from which can be entirely separate. From the infrastructure. From the infrastructure. So, for example, if OpenAI shows up and says, the BBC, can I retrieve this content? The BBC's Gateway needs to know whether or not it's allowed to. It needs to be able to validate. Who's asking?  
Me: Yep.  
Them: It needs to know the basic rules about whether or not it can provide something. But there might be loads of other rules beneath that. But that particular sort of that gateway doesn't need to know at all. So I think we should try to architect this in sort of relatively simple building blocks. Otherwise we quickly get lost in really, really granular detail, which I think at the moment is quite immaterial. I think establishing the principle. That events internally within the AA need to be reportable. And much more challenging. Needs to be auditable. How do we know they're telling the truth? First one, write it into an agreement. Get them to sign it.  
Me: Yep.  
Them: Brilliant. That's a pretty big win. Auditable. Not quite sure, but that's where our individual content IDs will help a lot.  
Me: Yep.  
Them: So the identifier that OpenAI get on Article A is a different identifier from the one topic at for the same article A. But I think we need to think about it in those relatively simple building block terms, or else. The detail. Will. Will try. So one of the things that became very complex with the copyright hub that I think we just don't need to bother with right now. The idea that rights are actually directly negotiating between machines. We'll get to that.  
Me: Y. Ep.  
Them: But right now we're talking a pretty big level. We're talking about big players doing big deals for big tranches of content. And those deals are going to be done human to human. And the machine will not have to negotiate very complex micro deals millions of times a minute. We'll get there.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Definitely. We're not there yet.  
Me: Yep. Agreed. And I think there's an ally in this. Whether it comes under spur, whether it's elsewhere. In brands as well. Like so the banks, for example, as content owners. Have a very similar concern. As BBC around, like, wanting to know when they're cited, how they're cited, is their content retrieved. And it just takes, like, it takes one Walmart plus the baby C plus the New York Times plus Ticketmaster, and all of a sudden, it's like you have a lot of lines in to get people. To sign that agreement of, like, oh, if we're going to give you our content, whether it's for free or paid, We need visibility, and we want to keep that simple, so I agree with that.  
Them: Right. And then version 1.1 might say, Here are additional trigger events. That we now want to define, and we want. We want to be available for deals. So we'll add a layer of granularity that they then need to negotiate into their deals, and we'll keep doing that. Until we get to a point where. An agent. Can negotiate sort of micro rights. On a case by case basis.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Fully automated, happening at huge volumes. That's the end State. That we want to imagine.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: And that's where even very, very small uses or interactions or even training might become within the scope. But I think for now, the biggest win of this project will be establishing our right to telemetry, even if it's quite basic.  
Me: Yep. Cool.  
Them: That's a huge, huge, huge win.  
Me: And to the point, really, like. Very specifically at time of inference. Right. So as opposed to part of the training set or like.  
Them: Yeah. For now. That's a big enough win, right? Because if they conceded the principal, That we have the right to knowledge of events happening within their system, then we have the upper hand when it comes to negotiating further granularity down the line. It's a principle that was never conceded for search. A similar principle and that Google had defended with billions and billions of dollars. However basic it is. That's. That's the thing that delivers our share of their market.  
Me: So. What do you all need for that? Right, like, is it a reference implementation through an agent that's not named ChatGPT that shows it's possible? Is it a. Like that sort of thing?  
Them: I think. Yeah, but. But for me, the starting point is to set out on paper exactly what the flow looks like. From an optimal perspective for this kind of journalistic use case, which is similar to that but subtly different in certain areas. Are we sort of saying now that initially at least, that's going to be focused really straightforwardly around inference, and we'll just narrowly tie it to that? That feels like a kind of logical decision, but it isn't a material decision for the project. I think it's probably the right one.  
Me: Yeah, it's definitely easier to. You don't have to get involved in. Hard machine learning problems of, like, extracting tokens in the middle of an inference process kind of stuff.  
Them: Yeah, and it's also, from an IP point of view, less controversial. I think. I think it's. It's the right call. We might call it minimum viable. The reason why it's the right call, aside from other things, is it something that. It'll be very hard for them to argue. They're incapable of knowing. Right. Because if it's in their output, then. They know it.  
Me: Sure.  
Them: Whereas there's loads of other things where they will use the old Google excuse so that it's impossible. You don't understand how complicated our systems are. It's, you know, you're living in la la land. So I think fixing on something that they cannot deny is available information. Is very sensible. I think the way we need to encourage our stakeholders to look at this is that all of these other use cases we can imagine, these are all business development opportunities. These are all things that, that extend our opportunity down the line. So. So the fact that we are not going to launch with that full stack of capability. Which is an ocean boiling challenge which will take years and years and years and will become far too political. Is not a disadvantage, it's a massive advantage. So simple. This case is super valuable. And I think the flow is quite simple. I think what I think we do need some sort of reference implementation. What it needs to show is that. A Publishers Gateway might just be their web server. Can identify, probably using a third party service. And authenticate non human robots and agents. So they need to do an authentication process. We need to know who it is. Are we doing that bit? I think the minimum viable is not that be. It's the bit subsequent to that. Well, the authentication piece, I think, needs some thought. The identification, which I think is third party. Right? Is this a bot or not? Yeah. Their own solution. I think we. I think the initial sort of ask. My. My take is the initial ask for us is all of that's happened. They're in are asking for something. And some might deliver that via clean API, some might deliver it by it, letting them scrape the site. But it's like there are known like, let's just. This is like Happy Path stuff, isn't it? So this is, let's say, user agent identifies itself as. OpenAI o AI search bot. That's known. It's how you handle everything beyond that point. Conceptually. Well, I think we're splitting hairs here. I think. If something says one problem you have at the moment, right, is things will show up saying they're Googlebot, but they're not Google bots. And the best overall therm skating that is because Google published their IP ranges. So. But there's a fairly sort of clunky way of sort of by sort of patchwork, trying to make a best guess at whether something is what it says it is. But there are plenty of. Ways of authenticating agents that exist already. It's not. It's not a complex or difficult thing. So when you're. When, when something shows up at your web server, And says I am the OpenAI bot. Your server is going to know because you would have told it whether the OpenAI bot has any rights to access your content or whether the average some bot or other. And if it's not on the list of yes, that's okay, then it gets sent off down a path of here's how you get authorization, but in the meantime, you're blogs. So that's the first split. Second thing I don't think is technically complex is you've got to deal with authorized bots. You've made an agreement with them, and so part of that agreement says, here's how you will authenticate so ensure it's you. It's some sort of, you know, encrypted. Token. It won't be difficult. But here's how. Here's how we'll know it's you and you'll know it's us. And then our machines can talk freely between each other. And you can. We can send you whatever we've agreed to send you, whether it's permission to scrape or format of files or blah, blah, blah, whatever. But for me, that part. Is the first fairly small building block.  
Me: So that is, I think Cloudflare and then Tolbit and by extension of Toolbit Akamai and fastly on the CDN level. Are. Try and answer that first piece of that, I think. The agent. Fingerprint thing. That's what I've poked at with manifest standard on OpenAttribution. That's still like the a agent to agent protocol thing. Is not really fit for purpose for that, because it's not an agent interacting with another agent as such. It's an agent interacting with a web server that gives it this label, this ability to say that thing. So that part agreed. I think that I think Tolbet Cloudflare is probably the right. First port of call. But there's also then, like, the content marketplaces are increasingly going to be the places that are serving that up. And so we want them to have a standard way of. Interacting with scrapers, right?  
Them: Y. Es. Yeah, I think. We want this to be basically as thin as possible so that it's interoperative with all of these. So, yeah, I sort of share that view. I think the assumption would be that the, the kind of authentication piece is, is out of scope because then that backs into your bot detection, it backs into your waf. Set all of that stuff. That's.  
Me: When it comes to the. I think to. Part of the idea then is that you say, okay. Bot showed up Web server or showed up Content Marketplace? Whichever. We've conveyed you license to read and then reproduce this content in whatever LLM way you're going to. But part of that says you have to tell us when you do so, which is requiring a telemetry, right? I think the biggest challenge that I see with that. So part of the reason I've tied it to, like, a sale event outcome is because it's a really clean. Receiver of. The data. But if you imagine your chat GPT, you now have 1000 Publishers all saying yes, you can use my content, but you have to tell us when you do. That's now a thousand Independent. Emissions that you have to send out. Publishers by Publishers Right. You can't just send like one packet of conversation telemetry. You have to send individual citations to each and every Publishers might have a different implementation. Right. Some will use their own internal, some will use the eventual Cloudflare one. Right. Whatever it is. So, ideally, it's all in the same standard, but it'll be a lot of. A lot of sync receiving.  
Them: Yeah.  
Me: The telemetry singles.  
Them: Do you think that's going to be a viable kind of pushback? As in the complexity of that process, or is that not.  
Me: Yeah. I mean, if I'm Google, I'll say it's expensive to send that many postbacks. That high volume, but. I think the API version of OpenAI and Gemini and all the rest give us a nice path for that. Because, like, if you forget the chat interface, if you just programmatically interact with these models, You turn on web search or not. And when you say yes. It goes and it returns a list of cited URLs. So we just say when it turns on web search. You just. You need to be sending these out. I think the biggest challenge that is going to be how do we store as an agent. You can't be expected to store 100,000 because we're talking about as effectively like domain listing. Again, you agent have to know 100,000 locations to send 100,000 citation events and they're all keyed to individual URL whatever.  
Them: So, but that, that doesn't that sort of push us towards some kind of centralized infrastructure?  
Me: Yeah. Or I mean, in true web3 blockchain style or like a decentralized repository. But yeah, it's the same as it's a Hooays lookup for Dominicy right? You have a domain name, you resolve it to an IP address. And maybe that's the collaboration.  
Them: If you have an identifier. That ought to be resolvable into that reverse path. Whatever, whatever. I think there is a role for some centralization for sort of concentrator, and I think it will emerge regardless, because in practice. Someone will do this as a service for people who don't want to have to manage it themselves. Now, whether that's us, And or others. It won't just be one, whatever happens, because no one's going to represent the entire constituency of content owners. It's bound to happen, right? Both sides will benefit. From, from that sort of concentrated emerging. So that needs to be part of the standard, the specification, even if, even if we're not actually going to take on that role ourselves, and that's down to our stakeholders. There's advantages and disadvantages to doing it. I think one question that we need to ask ourselves is, and this is something we need some input from the other side on. Is whether the. The license terms, I. E. What you can and can't do. Are carried as payload with the content somehow. Or I'll refer to offline somewhere that there is a. There is a resolvable. License. So somewhere or whatever, but. But, but actually.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: There's. There's two aspects. Well, there's three aspects. One is, do they have access or not?  
Me: Yep.  
Them: What do we send them? And by the way, even if it's access to scraper site, if you want to identify as you're going to have to have a gateway sitting in between the scraper and the and the and the recipient.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Second one is how do we sort of codify. Those permissions. And the third one is, is it efficient? To add extra payload the whole time.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Especially when it will still be an honesty based principle. The truth is telemetry data coming back will be based on honesty.  
Me: Yep.  
Them: And an adherence to contractual obligations, which tech companies have typically not been very good at.  
Me: That's it. There's your decentralized thing, so. The scrape happens. Rather than. I mean, so, hey, you could have centralized phone book. I scraped here. I have to admit that. Off it goes. You could also just embed it in the content or have Cloudflare send it. Right? Like this idea of, like, hey, you scrape me, here's your content. Here's your license. Here's the address you send telemetry to. As, like a standard piece of metadata on the content and let the agent resolve it itself. I think. Like, you basically just hit the business that I'm the proprietary stuff that I'm intending to do around open attribution, you kind of just hit on it, right? Is to say, like, here's the server that can be hosted by BBC to receive the telemetry data, and then here's the resolver. That any agent owner can either be hosting or putting pipes through to say, okay, I had a conversation. I cited all this stuff. I sent it off to this resolver. The resolver distributes the telemetry data out to the constituent. Publishers. You're right. That's infrastructure that gets built somewhere around these standards.  
Them: I mean, there's a bunch of ways this might work. I mean, the ultimate resolver in the end is the IS DNS. We don't need another resolver. There's just a question about where data sits. Ideally, you build this around stuff that the web's already good at, and you don't ask it to do it again. So, for example, and I'm thinking out loud here, so I might be talking rubbish, but if, in order to report a telemetry event, That's something that's been used in inference and has been cited to a user. Resolving the reporting event is a little bit like the technical agreements with loading a single pixel graphic, you know, as you call a URL. And that's it. Within that is the unique identifier, the event, everything. You know, you can build this to be quite simple and to, and to behave the way that the web really behaves, but it just needs to be some infrastructure. I personally think holding license terms externally on another resolvable repository. Makes sense. I don't think we want to be doing the licensing engine bit. No, I don't. I agree. I don't really need license again. Jin, at this point, I think the licensing engineers humans agreeing things. But if you're an AI and you want to know what the license says, you need to know where to look. Now, you either look within the content that's supplied to you. In other words, you replicate that information every single time you send content someone, or as a lookup where you can find it, that is. Probably the best use case, in my view of a blockchain. I think it feels like we kind of creeping into other territory that we probably don't need to go into. Like, effectively, the kind of use case for this is going to be through market power. Everyone on the sell side says you want a licensing deal, here's the terms. The terms say this. You have to send this telemetry back. Under those circumstances, you don't need any sort of licensing information, anything else. It's just there in your contract, and it's. It's a human thing. I don't think we should rule this out quite yet, because one of the problems you have with stuff written by humans. Is someone then does have to codify, right? Someone has to tell OpenAI systems. That they can do this thing with FT content but not that thing. And different for a different content. Right. Because those licenses won't all say the same thing. And if someone on the buy side is parsing the human written 10,000 word contract and trying to codify that in a way that that their system can understand, they will do that in the way that's most convenient. For them. There will be no. There'll be no sort of canon. Version of that. And that's where rights, expression, languages do matter. Because if you don't have a rights expression language of some sort, you end up with ambiguous interpretation that basically creates a loophole you can drive entire armies through. The thing that I'm reminded of is early on with acap, Google told us in a very conversational way when they were being friendly and nice. That the way they're boss at that point a long time ago now might not be the same interpreted robots text was as an instruction not to include something in search results. So they didn't knock cruel things where it was excluded by robots. Text. They just didn't display things. Now, I'm not sure most people would have agreed that that was the correct interpretation, but there was no canon version of what text meant, so they all interpreted it to suit themselves. So I think, although it is true that the licence will be negotiated and expressed primarily in a contract, It would also be describing, at least initially, a relatively small number of citable events that need to trigger something. And if the AI system is going to look for a machine readable version, unambiguous machine readable version of what that license allows and disallows, that should be one that we wrote not then. I agree. Just thinking about sort of speed to getting a minimal viable thing in front of it feels like that. That becomes quite complex quite quickly. Whereas if we're just dealing with the telemetry piece. Well, it may or may not. I don't think we should. I don't think we should think. Whether or not it's on the critical path. As a must have before we can launch anything. I don't think we know yet. It might be incredibly simple. It might be a file that looks a bit like a robots txt file. Just a simple bit of text. That's it. This is why I think it might be a good blockchain example, because Once it's on a blockchain, it can't be altered without it leaving a trace. So it cannot be sort of varied after the fact, but it might be as simple as that. There's a reference to it. I think it's within scope for scoping, if you see what I mean. It may or may not be in scope for building, and at least in version 1, Okay? Cool.  
Me: Yep. Makes sense, right? So, I mean, version one, I guess, from a deliverable. There's a little bit of just a what and when. Element to it. Right. Do you have expectations from the spur group to be presenting a solution soon kind of thing? What's the.  
Them: I think the conceptual idea of how we think this telemetry works, I think basically it's an enhancement of what you just showed us, but built around this use case with probably a bit more detail on the flows and how it all, you know, how it works in practice. I think the sooner we can get that in front of them. Amazing. The better. We want to really quickly show progress. I. Then I think it's. Then it goes into more. More detailed.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Discovery work about which parts we build and so on. What do you say, Dom? I mean, it's exciting.  
Me: More detail. I think in that vein. Right, so. There's more in here that doesn't need to be like this. Ignore that stuff right now. Right. But basically. The way I've been going through this. Okay, so here's the fan out process, right? Where at time of inference, the bot goes and searches stuff. This is what we're talking about. Passes through these areas. Sometimes CDN and bought paywall are the same, and that's where that gets resolved. The red lines here are the telemetry events that I think we should, can and should record. So red is received by whatever sync takes into telemetry. We got a retrieval because it was either reported to us from the distributor. Or from the agent itself. It then goes and makes its prompt, prepares its response. I've been playing with two different directions of this. One is basically a compliance trust and safety blind server in the middle that an agent can say, okay, we send it through. It doesn't send user context out to a third party. But it does check against. Is it violating XYZ practices? And that's a really extreme. That's a big build and a lot of trust building.  
Them: I think they would have the appetite to do that.  
Me: Yeah, exactly. So that's what really is more about saying preparers response. And the final response needs to include this Publishers references or citations that get punched in. Right. And the citation is the street, more streamlined, straightforward path.  
Them: 's the. Just. Just. So that's a separate event to the inference, right?  
Me: And that's how I'm thinking of it now, is that the retrieval versus the actual quotation or citation has different values to it and is worth reporting separately.  
Them: I think that's exactly right, yeah.  
Me: But it's pretty stripped down. I mean, at the end of the day, Did it get pulled out of a box? Cool. And then did it get shown to a user once it was out of the box or just thrown away?  
Them: Yeah.  
Me: There's a big.  
Them: Well, I think. I think we should. I mean, once it's been. Once it's out of the box and it's in their box. I think a working assumption is it stays there forever, and it might get cited multiple times without being retrieved again. So that's why you need to separate them. Even if it's never cited, it's there, it's got its identifier, and it can be a dormant. Asset, in which case we never hear back from it. In terms of what. Data we want. What do we want when it comes to citation? The fact it's been cited, and possibly whether it was a sort of consumer or enterprise user. But they don't need to know much more, do we? I think that's a really good one. So agree with that, like, hopefully. So you might want to know there's all kinds of metadata that might be interesting from a sort of value point of view. If it's via vertex, for instance, like if it was on a third party application. But I think at this stage, There's a couple of things. One is if we are doing anything that appears to be intrusive or personally disclosing or anything like that. Firstly, it gives them a really good reason not to collaborate. And second is news organizations. We're about to fucking hypocrites because we would never dish out that sort of information to anybody. So I think we should be going for the we should be going for the happy path of the simplest pathway to establishing the principle. We have a right to know. And reserving what we have a right to know and turning the thumb screws on that. Down the line for a couple of reasons. One is because we do not want to create barriers to our own success. So asking for the impossible is pointless. Secondly, because there's quite a lot of things we think might be valuable, but the more experience we have with these systems and the more we can look at our own data and work out the impact of this activity, the more we'll know what to ask for next. It might not be the expected thing. And then we need to work out how we gain the commercial leverage to actually get it. But the second anyone can say content owners are spying on AI users, We've got ourselves absolute own goal when it comes to PR and comms, and it's probably not very valuable anyway at this stage. Yeah, I'm sure that's right. That's going to be pretty. That will be very. It will basically be an inference usage event, right? It has been shown to a user and David's been shown to a new.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Was it the. Yeah.  
Me: So.  
Them: How do we use that in it? Yeah, okay, cool. Yeah, that sounds good. I mean, the beat. I know the BBC are quite concerned about misattribution and all of that, but we're never going to get the actual. What the outputs, are we? That's just never going to happen. Well, I see. I think. That's where. If we can show that that's happening, that's where we can go back and say, here's a problem. Now we've established our right to data, let's work out a way of solving this problem which doesn't create problems for you and us otherwise. If we think that the misinformation problem is a misattribution problem is too expensive for us, we're going to withdraw. We're going to have to scale back. So once our foot's in the door, all of those things come downstream. Opportunities to ration over time. Right? You establish a really simple idea at the start. Relatively uncontroversial and you take a ten year view. On ratcheting. To extract more value and to establish more control. Try and get it all on day one. Forget about it. Yeah, okay, that makes perfect sense.  
Me: The. And there's some really interesting stuff. And as I like the blind. The blind server that could check stuff is like. It's like effectively hallucination detection. So you could almost say, here's the BBC's full corpus. Chatgpt sends a response into it. Blind server checks against the corpus and says, yes, this is fine. We'd have to defend that methodology and stuff, and then sends it back. But I agree with you, Dom. That's a. That's a once the foot's in the door conversation.  
Them: But also, even then, you're in a world of pain because you might have absolutely accurately quoted a section of a BBC article. No changes. However, the thing you put immediately before it. Creates the wrong context for it and makes it misleading. So you need another AI to check up on the AIs? I just. It's a world of pain. To go early on. We're exactly right to identify it as an issue. Trying to solve it. We don't have to luxury of being able to solve that if we hadn't established our right. And heads explode. When you start thinking about it, it's too difficult. Yeah.  
Me: So the way I've been thinking about building on that is to set up for a future. So, like, to me, there's the. You've kind of got the two pass, right? You've got your version where you say, okay. These are my shapes. You got your version where you're sitting there like, okay, cool. We go away? Have your chat. GPT. And that then emits out directly to Publishers right? But then I think the other, the path that's going to be really increasingly a thing. Is that there's an API call here. That goes to some kind of third party agent. Right. And so now when you enable web search on this path, ChatGPT theoretically needs to have this license to be sending ChatGPT out to the web searcher for you. It goes to third party agent. Right? Let's say this is, for example, I don't know, the BBC makes an agent one day. Right? And then that gets produced out to the user, and then we need to be able to say, okay, back to this agent. Or sorry. This agent needs to be able to say out to the telemetry server or the Publishers That they used it.  
Them: But doesn't it go back to ChatGPT and then out to the user?  
Me: Well, I guess that's the question, right? Do we want. Do we Want to say ChatGPT on your API or in your user interface? You have to be sending this to us because you're responsible at the end of the day for having done the inference. As opposed to the agent's surface that is triggering the inference.  
Them: So by your writing copy Asian. That's where I'm thinking. BBC API. And maybe that's just a semantic difference that the chat GPT request goes to a different BBC hosted or authorized.  
Me: No.  
Them: Gateway.  
Me: No, I'm thinking like this. This is a good example. So these folks are. A chatgpt wrapper, basically. Right, and they're here to help you to do travel stuff, but they might look up, like Lonely Planet. Along the way, or they'll enable web search through ChatGPT. And so there's this concept of as they're part of their rag, do we want to hold Mind Trip responsible for having to still admit the telemetry, or is it just whatever they've wrapped around the ChatGPT. And I think my business is now getting speculation. But like, I think. This is the future we're designing it for. More even than the individual ChatGPT interface. Right? It's this, like, proliferation of. Those foundation models and their web search capability out into a million surfaces.  
Them: I mean, the obvious way to do it. Again, version one. Is that we impose on the foundation models the obligation to capture the downstream telemetry data and to funnel it through. Because it will be too complex to manage that plethora of direct relationships until we have an automated licensing engine that doesn't require formal negotiated agreements between everybody. But longer term, we will definitely need that. Because firstly, the more pass through points you have in the chain, the more opportunity there is for things to become corrupted in some way, deliberately or accidentally. And the more sort of levels of accountability you've got, the harder it will be ever to hold anyone accountable. But again, day one, what you want to say is, if you want to supply our content to any downstream API customers of yours, You have to pass this obligation through to them, and you have to pass the metadata back, the telemetry data back to us. Probably be imperfect. But again, establishing that precedent will give us the foundation on which we can then say, well, actually, now you can record that.  
Me: Yep, I agree with that. Makes sense. I think my other. Other version of this. There's. Sorry. Let me share this tab instead. There's this also set up. So one of the things that I'm kind of using to demonstrate to Agent Builders why they should do this. Is that there is this situation where if you do web search right now. You kind of get this generic set of whatever Google thinks it should show you, and you're hoping that ChatGPT has licensed it correctly. Or if you do first party agreements through marketplaces, then you can make your search smarter by having exactly the content you want as an ancient owner, right? Rather than just like trusting chat GPT. And my argument goes that if you're going to do that. Then you should license the content directly. You go through the marketplace, and this is the audit trail for that. So I think that as a wedge. I agree with you. Getting the foundation models to do it is. That's the main goal. But then if ChatGPT in New York Times don't come to an agreement, but New York Times personal agent or like someone else license New York Times on rapping on top of the foundation model. We want a Mechanism where that third party agent can also say, yeah, ChatGPT can't look up New York Times, but I can, because I'm brokered a deal and now I can, as terms of that deal, emit that signal, right?  
Them: For that to work. A next version along for us.  
Me: Yeah, yeah, for sure. And that's more just I think the implementation paths of the telemetry can be in foundation or in implementation of Asian.  
Them: And it will become a. It will become a sort of API access thing in a way. And actually, your example is interesting because the value could go in either direction.  
Me: Y. Eah.  
Them: What you're looking at there. Will become an affiliate marketplace, won't it? Where I want to sell more drills. So when I managed to sell an extra drill or I get surfaced, you know, you'll be. The money will be flowing from the beneficiary to the. To the provider of the benefit.  
Me: Yeah. Yeah.  
Them: In our case, we think about that always going from us as, as, as. As the provider. The benefit needs to come back to us.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: But I'm selling drills. It'll be the other way around, so.  
Me: Yeah, and that's, I think, where the. And that's just bridging. Right. Like I'm talking to the Independent Telegraph commerce teams specifically about that, like commerce content and affiliate context, because that's those things. Right. So that's, that's where you're seeing that crossover. Yeah. So. Okay, so two things. A business would be useful. I think this makes a lot of sense. The thin, thin telemetry side. Yes. We need to figure out the authentication layer, if that's something we want to go for. I do need to run in seven minutes, but. How do we want to engage, I guess, is the question.  
Them: In more sense, Alex. Do you mean with. With the grade?  
Me: Yeah. And just with me directly. Right. Like, I think. A lot of the materials that I've already put together, I think are pretty. A pretty quick repurpose into these conversations, right?  
Them: Amazing.  
Me: More than happy to help with that. I'm even more free to help with that after. I finish my notice period in the next few weeks. But I'll also be unemployed, so getting. Getting paid in some format. Is is good.  
Them: Yes.  
Me: I also fully like, I'm stoked about this initiative. Like, I'm however I can help, I'm on board for right.  
Them: Yeah. So from my perspective, like, we don't if you disagree, but Dom, but we would love you on board to like to be effectively like technical lead around that around the telemetry piece. And we want to show early momentum with the stakeholders is the kind of key thing. Now, from my point of view, I'D be happy with you starting to build time and track time against the project. On the rate that you you gave to us, we're tracking in 15 minute increments. Like, I think the starting point is agreeing, like, what are the. What are the kind of deliverables. And. And then cracking on with that, basically. Dom. Yeah, I think the only thing is. Speaking for myself and how my brain is organizing. This one is a sort of landscape review.  
Me: Yep.  
Them: What are existing initiatives, technical standards, evolving standards and so on that exist out there. Second one is a sort of roadmap, not purely technical, but a sort of functional requirements roadmap, which we start off with the very simplest use case that we've been talking about, that builds as much as possible on existing technology.  
Me: Yep.  
Them: And offers the fewest points of resistance by the buy side.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: And we do map out a roadmap beyond that. And I think we've really come up with a few things that we can see on that roadmap. That will either be technically more demanding, will require the market to evolve a little bit in order to know the best direction. And we'll also require a sort of. Debate about whether we want to increase the amount of resourcing we're going to put into centralizing some functionality.  
Me: Y.  
Them: Versus designing for a distributed. Infrastructure. Where as a service providers will step into that realm if needed. But we'll, we'll stay out of it. I don't. Yeah. The minute the, the view is but let's definitely stay away from that. Largely, I think, because it sounds expensive.  
Me: Eah.  
Them: As we move down this pathway. Actually, the case for that might might change. There might be strong arguments, both commercial and operational, for doing it. So, so I think we need to just keep, keep, keep that open. But I think defining that use case and beginning a little bit of a sort of functional roadmap piece.  
Me: Y.  
Them: Pretty valuable. I think we probably can build a reference implementation of some sort, or at least we can cause one to be built, or at least we should be open to that.  
Me: Eah, yeah.  
Them: If we can find a friendly mid tier AI that wants to play. Or else we can create a sort of dummy client in order to show how it works. We can put something on the front of at least one content provider who has a well organized content database and well structured systems. The one that springs to mind is always the guardian, because they seem both to have quite a well structured system and also they have an API which they're willing to give useful. To let people do this sort of thing.  
Me: Y.  
Them: I think showing something real. If we can do it. Simple components without major engineering effort.  
Me: Ep.  
Them: You see, it always becomes more visible. You have to think about how we make it actually visible. Because it's kind of a backendy sort of thing, and it doesn't necessarily show that. But I think that would be super helpful and it will help when you're talking to technical teams because you can say, look, here's how this works and here's what we did.  
Me: Yep.  
Them: That's my sense of it. And then we constantly review that roadmap and have a. Have a. Pipeline of what's next.  
Me: Okay? So. Yep, makes sense to me. The day rate billing part I need to get my head around some because there's. Well, hey, I just haven't done it in the past. But also porting over. So this is so very use case specific. Right. But I've basically built out a harness to be able to roll this kind of thing out. Really very quickly. And so like this cute little fox. Is a AI agent with full telemetry, and I can I'm not going to the back end. But like, when you ask questions of it, when it does its thing right, it is giving you responses, it's quoting from various sources, and it's sending telemetry back into the system that I'VE built in the back end, right? And so every engagement with content, every engagement with a click, that kind of stuff is all part of that. And that's the reference invitation I built. I raised that partly because also because.  
Them: I raised that. Yeah.  
Me: It'll take me about an hour to send that your way. And I don't necessarily think it's worth 700 divided by £8. So I want to find the right way to go. Okay. What's the. What's the delivery like? You want the invitation? That makes great sense. Happy to deliver that. Both the server implementation and. The front end agent. I also don't want to shoot myself in the foot and have two days of like, here's next Thursday, Friday, job done, guys. I'll see you next. Next year, you know, So I think just navigating that will be. Is the only part.  
Them: Yeah. I think Dom and I really need to have a chat about that. And think about what the right way of doing it might be. There's a number of mechanisms I can think of. Dom, should we catch up? I mean, firstly, like, personally totally hear you, and we're not creating the right incentives for you. If we're saying burn up three days, send me an email. Right. Doesn't make any sense. So. Robbie, you would do that, but do you know what I mean? Like, we just need to. Make sure that we're recognizing.  
Me: Yeah, exactly. And that's, I think, also just my. My general incentive is, like. Technically wise. Like, yeah, I want to be involved in what y'all are building. Right. Like, I think it's outside of even just the build side. It's super exciting. So being part of.  
Them: So let's just talk a bit more about the breadth of the role, because I think that part is relatively small.  
Me: Yeah.  
Them: Part of it, obviously valuable, but I think there's a big communications thing here. There's a, there's a. There's a company, people along this kind of working groups because you need, you need, you need buy in. There's quite a lot of stuff. Yeah, I agree with David about perverse incentives, and we should certainly should not allow that to happen. But actually, this is a sort of cultural and human. Project as much as a technical one, and I think that's an important part of what we need.  
Me: Yeah. Cool. Okay, I do need to pop off, but, yeah. Stoked. So, yeah, let me. Let me know what you're thinking there and what we can formally do, and then I can get started as soon as you're ready.  
Them: Awesome. All right. From my perspective, I think, like, we. We're good to get going, right? There's stuff that, you know, that landscape review, that sort of, that workflow mapping, like, I think we can get. We can start on that now. What Dom and I need to chat about separately is, like, how we rec. What the means of. Recognizing the value you're sort of bringing in.  
Me: Cool. Well, then why don't I do this just as a very nominal thing? So I'll earmark either tomorrow or Monday. As a spur day, I will build out my suggested roadmap and that stuff specifically around this conversation. We'll call that. Just build a day rate for that thing and then we can get you middle of next week and go. This is what we're. This is what I'm proposing. You all knock things out of that roadmap you don't like, and then we go from there.  
Them: Perfect. Sounds great.  
Me: Awesome. Thanks.  
Them: Nice work. Yes, guys.  
Me: Bye.
